### Black Box
- A black box is a device whose outputs depends only on its inputs.
- To use it, you don't need to know know how it works, or what is inside.
- A Black Box abstracts away details and considers only functionality.

We saw it in action when building a multi-bit adder
- In this circuit for adding two 4-bit binary numbers, each Full-Adder is expressed as a black box.
- We can go further and express the whole 4-bit adder as a black box

## So Far
### Human : 
- Symbolic information
    - Text, ideas...
    - Sensory information
        - Sound, colour, pressure

### Machine : 
- Switching circuits   
- 2 states
    - On / Off

### The Bridge : Modelling Information with Numbers and Interpretation
- Here this number means text, there it means audio, etc...
- Base-10 for people, Base-2 most 'natural' for computers
- Larger bases
    - Fewer digits needed for given number but more symbols needed
- Smaller bases
    - More digits needed for given number but fewer symbols needed leading to greater simplicity

#### the number of numbers we can represent is limited by the physical constraints of our machine.
- How many numbers can we represent?
    - How many bits can we manipulate?
- How many numbers do we need for different kinds of data?
    - We not only want to use numbers for calculation but also to represent things in collections.
- What kinds of interpretations do we apply to our numbers?
    - Integers, real numbers, characters, instructions...

## Processes
- Arithmetic Manipulation
- "Analyse"
- Animating an Algorithm...

#### These are implemented by :
- Logical manipulation
    - `AND`, `OR`, `NOT`
- Insights of Boole, Shannon, von Neumann
- Logic gate building block for components to implement algebraic manipulation
- Dynamically create pathways to implement "instructions"

### Examples of these so far : 
- Full-Adder
- Multi-bit Addition
- Mutiplexers, demultiplexers


[Previous](12_2_20.md) | [Next](18_2_20.md)