## Interpreting Bit Combinations
We recognise that we have only a fixed number of bits to represent information in our computer. The number may be 32-bits, 64-bits, or something else. Regardless of what the number is, however, it will be fixed at design time.

### Different Interpretations
Given a particular interpretation of the bits we are manipulating, each bit combination refers to a specific piece of information within that interpretation.

### Representing Natural Numbers
Therefore, if we are interested in representing natural numbers we see each combination of bits as a binary number from 0 -> 2^n - 1
- If we have 4-bits, for example, we can represent numbers from 0 -> 2^4 - 1, i.e. from 0 to 15.

### Representing Instructions
Likewise, if we are interested in representing instructions, we see each combinations as composed of different fields whose corresponding binary value represents an operation code and register numbers, for example.
- Thus, as we have seen, the Samphire instruction `add al, bl` is just a 24-bit number and consists of 3 fields, each 8-bits long : 
    - `add al, bl` is equivalent to
    - `A0 00 01`

## Representing Negative Numbers
Since, for a given number of bits n, we are limited to 2^n combinations, if we wish to represent both positive and negative numbers, we must share the combination among them.

2^n is always even. Therefore, we could consider having 2^(n-1) positive numbers and 2^(n-1) negative numbers.

#### What about 0?
- If we consider 0 as positive, an dwe decide that our positive numbers are at the start of the binary counting sequence, our positive range would be from 0 -> 2^(n-1) - 1, i.e. for n = 4, it would be from 0 to 7
- Similarly, our negative range would extend from 2^(n-1)

We see that if we are to have only one value for 0, that the number of non-zero positive numbers is one less than the non-zero negative numbers.

#### Note : The Most Significant Bit(MSB) is 0 for the positive numbers and the MSB is 1 for the negative numbers

#### Allocating the Negative Numbers
- It would be nice if x + (-x) = 0
- Thus, we assign -1 the value 1111 in a 4-bit sequence since -1 + 1 = 0, and 0001 + 1111 = (1)0000, however the 1 is discarded since this bit sequence can only host at most 4 bits. 

|Bit Sequence|Natural Number|Signed Number
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|0000|0|0
|0001|1|1
|0010|2|2
|0011|3|3
|0100|4|4
|0101|5|5
|0110|6|6
|0111|7|7
|1000|8|-8
|1001|9|-7
|1010|A|-6
|1011|B|-5
|1100|C|-4
|1101|D|-3
|1110|E|-2
|1111|F|-1

This unbalanced convention for representing negative numbers is called 2's complement notation.

[Previous](18_2_20.md) | [Next](24_2_20.md)