## Interpretation vs Translation
- Interpretation computes the code line by line
- Translation completely translates the code to a lower-level language

Different 'virtual machines' :<br/>
- Level 6 : The User | Executable Programs
- Level 5 : High Level Language | C++, Java, etc.
- Level 4 : Assembly Language | Assembly Code
- Level 3 : System Software | OSes, Library Code
- Level 2 : Machine | Instruction Set Architecture
- Level 1 : Control | Microcode or Hardwired
- Level 0 : Digital Logic | Circuits, Gates, etc.
- Level -1 : Microprocessors and ICs
#### Movement between these levels is done by translation or interpretation.

Each level has its own architecture :<br/>
- M0 - Actual Hardware, programs in L0 are executed by the electronic circuits
- VM1 - Machine Language L1, programs in L1 are either interpreted by and interpreter running on M0, or are translated to L0
- VM2 - Machine Language L2, programs in L2 are either interpreted by interpreters running on M1 or M0, or are translated to L1 or L0
- VM3 - Machine Language L3,programs in L3 are either interpreted by interpreters running on M2, M1 or M0, or are translated to L2, L1 or L0
- VMn - Machine Language Ln are either interpreted by an interpreter running on a lower machine or are translated to a lower level language

### Level 0 
A collection of gates which can be used to create registers which store 1 bit. The gates and circuits are made of transistors which can turn on and off, represented in programming by 1 and 0.

### Level 1 
Microarchitecture level, a collection of 8-32 registers that form a local memory, a Control Unit and a circuit called an ALU(Arithmetic Logic Unit), which is capable of performing simple arithmetic operations. The registers are connected to the ALU to form a data path(bus), over which the data flow.
- The basic operation of the data path consists of selecting one or two registers, having the ALU operate on them(e.g. ADD), and storing the result back in a register. 
- On some machines the operation of the data path is controlled by a program called a microprogram. On other machines the data path is controlled directly by the hardware.

### Level 2
- Instruction Set Architecture Level(ISA), consists of a number of Instructions(defined in the hardware's manufacturer's "Machine Reference Manual").
- These are the instructions carried out interpretively by the microprogram or hardware execution circuits.

### Level 3
- The OS Machine Level is a hybrid level. Most of the instructions here are also in the ISA level. In addition, there is a set of new instructions, a different memory organisation, the ability to run two or more programs concurrently, and various other features.
- The new facilities added at Level 3 are carried out by an interpreter running at Level 2, which , historically, been called an Operating System.
#### There is a fundamental break between Levels 3 and 4. 
- The lowest three levels are not designed for use by application programmers. 
- They are intended primarily for running the interpreters and translators needed to support the higher levels. These interpreters and translators are written by system programmers who specialise in designing and implementing new virtual machines.
- Levels 4 and above are intended for the application programming.

### Level 4
The Assembly Language Level is a symbolic form for one of the underlying languages.
- This level provides a method for people to write programs for Levels 1, 2 and 3 in a more human-friendly form than languages at those levels.
- Programs in assembly language are first translated to Level 1/2/3 language and then interpreted by the appropriate virtual or actual machine.
- The program that performs the translation is called an assembler.

### Level 5 
This consists of languages designed to be used by application programmers.
- Such languages are called high-level languages, e.g. Python, Java, etc.
-Programs written in these languages are generally translated to L3/4 by translators known as compilers

### Summary
- Computers are designed as a series of levels, each one built on its predecessors. Each level represents a distinct abstraction, with different objects and operations present.
#### The set of data types, operations, and features of each level is called its architecture.
- The architecture deals with those aspects that are visible to the user of that level. Features that the programmer sees, such as how much memory is available, are part of the architecture.
- Implementation aspects, such as what kind of technology is used to implement the technology is not part of computer architecture
