## Virtual Memory
### History
- In the early days of computers, memory was small and expensive.
- The IBM 650, the leading scientific computer of the late 1950's had only 2000 words of memory
- One of the first ALGOL 60 compilers was written for a computer with only 1024 words of memory
- In those days the programmer spent a lot of time trying to squeeze programs into the tiny memory
- The traditional solution to this problem was to use a secondary memory, such as a disk
- The programmer divided the program up into a number of pieces, called overlays, each of which could fit into the memory
- To run the program, the first overlay was brought in to memory and its code ran for a while, It then read in the next overlay and that code ran for a while, and so on. The programmer was responsible for breaking the program into overlays, deciding where in the secondary memory each overlay was to be kept, arranging for the transport of overlays between main memory and secondary memory, and in general managing the whole overlay process without any help from the computer
### Inception of Virtual Memory
- In 1961 a group of researchers in Manchester, England proposed a method for performing the overlay process automatically, without the programmer even knowing that it was happening.
- This method now called **virtual memory** had the obvious advantage of freeing the programmer from a lot of annoying bookkeeping.
- By the early 1970s virtual memory had become available on most computers

### Paging
- The Manchester group wanted to separate the concepts of address space and memory locations
- Consider a typical computer which might have had a 16-bit address field in its instructions and 4096 words of memory.
- A program on this computer could potentially address 65536 words of memory(65536 = 2^16)
- Therefore, the **address space** for this computer consists of the addresses 0,1,2,3...65535
- Many computers of the day had fewer than 65535 words of memory
- Prior to the contribution of the Manchester group, people did not make a distinction between address space and memory locations, because the hardware enforced a one-to-one correspondence between them

- A 4KB machine without virtual memory simply has a fixed mapping between the addresses 0 to 4095.
- A question is "What happens if a program branches to an address between 8192 and 12287?"
- On a machine without virtual memory, the program generates an error and terminates.
- On a machine with virtual memory, the following occurs   
    - The contents of main memory is saved to dis
    - Words 8192 to 12287 are located on the disk
    - Words 8192 to 12287 are loaded into memory.
    - The address map is changed to map addresses 8192 to 12287 onto memory locations 0 to 4095
    - Execution continues as though nothing unusual has happened

#### This technique for automatic overlaying is called *paging* and the chunks of program read in from disk are called _pages_.

- To avoid confusion, the addresses referred to by the program are collectively called the virtual address space, and the physical memory locations, the physical address page.
- Page sizes ranging from 512 bytes to 64 kilobytes per page are common at present although sizes as large as 4 Megabytes are used occasionally.
- The page size is always a power of 2, for example 2^*k*, so that all the addresses can be represented in *k* bits.
- The physical address space is broken up into pieces in a similar way, each piece being the same size as a page, so that each piece of main memory is capable of holding exactly one page.
- These pieces of main memory into which the pages go are called page frames. In our previous example, the main memory contains a single page frame.

### Implementation of Paging
- The virtual memory is administered by means of a page table with as many entries as there are pages in the virtual address space.
- The Memory Management Unit manages the virtual memory on computers
- For a 32-bit machine, the MMU has a 20-bit virtual page and a 12-bit offset
    - The virtual page represents the page
    - The offset represents the offset area in physical memory into which the page will be inserted
- The virtual page number is used as an index into the page table to find the entry for the page referenced
- Here entry 3 of the page table is selected.
- The MMU checks if the page is already in the memory by looking at the **present/absent bit** in the page-table entry
- Here, the bit is 1, meaning the page is currently in memory.
- The next step is to take the page-frame value from the selected entry and copy it into the upper 3 bits of the 15-bit output register
- Three bits are needed because there are eight page frames in physical memory.
- In parallel with this operation, the lower-order 12 bits of the virtual address are copied into the low-order 12 bits of the output register
- This 15-bit address is now sent to cache to be searched