## Virtual Address Mapping
Suppose we have a 32-bit machine. In theory, we could generate 2^32 different addresses : 0 -> 2^32 - 1

#### Note :  2^32 = 3(2^10) * 2^2

We begin by breaking this "address space" up into a number of 'pages' of equal size.
- A page is a block of addresses

Suppose we choose a page size of 4k (2^2 * 2^10)
- Assuming each address identifies 1 byte, each page could hold 4kB of information
- Thus we will have 2^10 * 2^10 ~ 1 million pages in our 32-bit machine.

Suppose our physical machine only has 32kB of memory. To address any physical location in that memory, we would need 15 address bits, 2^15 = 32k(diagram)

### Virtual Memory - Demand Paging
- When a reference is made to an address on a page not present in main memory, a **page fault**, is said to occur.
- The OS must read in the required page into memory from the disk, enter its new physical memory location in the page table, and then repeat the instruction that caused the fault.
- This method of obtaining a virtual memory page is called **demand paging** 

### Working Set Model
- Most programs do not reference their address space uniformly - references tend to cluster on a small number of pages.
- This concept is called the **locality principle**
- A memory reference may fetch an instruction, it may fetch data, or it may store data. At any instant in time t, there exists a set consisting of all the pages used by the k most recent memory references. This is called the **working set**
- Because the working set normally varies slowly with time, it is possible to make a reasonable guess at the pages that will be needed when the program is started/restarted, on the basis of the working set when it was last stopped. These pages can then be loaded in advance before starting the program up

### Page Replacement Policy 
- Programmers rarely know which pages are in the working set, so the OS must discover this set dynamically.
- To make room for a new page, some other page will generally have to be sent back to the disk. Thus an algorithm is needed to decide which page to remove.

#### Least Recently Used Algorithm 
#### First-in First-out(FIFO) Algorithm

#### Problem with page replacement algorithms
If the working set is larger than the number of available pages, no algorithm will give a good result

#### Thrashing 
- A program that generates page faults frequently and continuously is said to be thrashing